## Canvas Summary

This paper examines the spillover effects of drilling and production on a plot of land on the neighboring lands. The effects of spillovers are ambiguous because there are two competing effects: (1) the substitution effect, where being near a low-cost plot lowers your probability of drilling and production because firms prefers to begin its search for oil and gas on a low-cost plot, and (2) the total cost effect, where being near a low-cost plot increases your probability of drilling and production on a high-cost plot since it lowers total expected costs of drilling.

To model the spillover effects, the paper uses a model of two adjoining plots, where each plot can have at most one well drilled. Plot 1 is in state ownership and plot 2 is in federal ownership, and the mode examines how proximity to state lands affects drilling and production outcomes on federal lands. Operating across two periods, the firms decides whether to drill and which plot to drill in both periods. What is important is that drilling a plot in the first period can give information on the second plot's productivity. Through this model, we can see the substitution effect and total cost effect at work. 

To test which effect dominates empirically, the paper exploits a natural experiment where the federal government transferred plots randomly according to a grid system to the state of Wyoming. This resulted in exogenous variation in whether land was owned by the federal or state government. Since the federal government has stricter environmental policies as well as differences in royalties, primary terms, and delay rentals, it is generally seen as being costlier for a firm to operate on federal land when compared to state land. Therefore, this experiment maps to exogenous variation in cost of drilling on a plot of land. 

Using the instrument of whether or not a section is assigned to the state, and examining the federal land close vs far away from these state assigned sections, the paper looks at an intent-to-treat effects, finding that:

- The sections assigned to the state are much more likely to have wildcat wells on them
- Nearby sections are the least likely to have these exploratory wells, suggesting the substitution effect is dominating 
- Nearby sections also have lower production than faraway sections 

 

**Discussion:**

The natural experiment here is very clean and believable, giving a very nice setting to test out the substitution and total cost effect. It was especially helpful to read through the background info to fully buy into the exogeneity of the variation. I also appreciated how much the author tied in policy impacts of spillover effects, giving an example of the effects at work from NEPA in 1970.

This is perhaps outside the scope of this story, but I wonder if there is some sort of firm selection story going on here. Perhaps bigger or more productive firms are selecting onto state vs federal parcels, or able to buy more continguous leases and thereby attain more information about productivity of the land. Perhaps this isn't in the data, but having some sort of firm fixed effect or examining what is happening within firms would be an interesting extension. 

While this has huge implications in the US oil and gas market which has these patchworks of mineral rights all over the place, I wonder what a more general application of this type of spatial spillover is? 