# The Problem of Social Cost

* Question is usually framed as 'A inflicts harm on B and thus how should we restrain A?'. 
* But the problem is reciprocal in nature, and the real question is: "Should A be allowed to harm B or should B be allowed to harm A?"
* Ex: If a straying cattle destroys crops on neighboring land, then an increase in the supply of meat can only be obtained at the expense of a decrease in the supply of crops. The nature o the choice is: meat or crops. What answer should be given is not clear unless we know the value of what is obtained as well as the vale of what is sacrificed to obtain it. 
* "The problem which we face in dealing with actions which have harmful effects is not simply one of restraining those responsible for them. What has to be decided is whether the gain from preventing the harm is greater than the loss which would be suffered elsewhere as a result of stopping the action which produces the harm"



## Canvas Summary

This paper aims to expose the weaknesses of Pigou's analysis of social cost, beginning with how the problem is defined. We typically think of a negative externality as 'A inflicts harm on B and thus how should we restrain A?'. Coase points out that the problem is reciprocal in nature, and the real question is: "Should A be allowed to harm B or should B be allowed to harm A?" Framing the question in this way, negative externalities arise from incompatible interactions between two parties rather than one party imposing a harm on another. 

After recasting the problem, Coase examines examples of this problem and demonstrates that under perfect competition and costless market transactions, private negotiations can give efficient results. This happens regardless of which part is deemed liable. The solution here is not to impose responsibility on the action that is actively creating an externality. Rather it is to decide whether the gain from preventing the externality is greater than the loss suffered when we prevent the action. In this way, Coase highlights the failure of a Pigouvian framework to properly account for opportunity costs. 

This surprising result no longer holds when market transactions have a cost, and Coase finds that the delimitation of rights and liability does have an effect on economic efficiency. He emphasizes the importance of the legal and economic system in determining the appropriate social arrangements for dealing with externalities. 

What is important here is that Coase does not give a one-size fits all approach. He states that "it is clear that the government has powers which might enable it to get some things done at a lower cost than could a private organisation ... But equally, there is no reason why, on occasion, such governmental administrative regulation should not lead to an improvement in economic efficiency" (18). 

Turning to a direct refutation of Pigouvian logic, Coase turns to Pigou's railway example, that British railway should be liable for the damages done to surrounding woods that result from engine sparks. When an economist is comparing alternative social arrangements, the proper approach is to compare the total social product that arise from different legal regimes. The comparison of private and social products is not what is important! In the railway example, where the Pigouvian approach might impose a tax such that that the railway has to shut down, but it neglects to take into account societal benefits of transport services to total production

All of this leads to a final critique of Pigouvian methods and welfare economics in general. Pigouvian methods calculate welfare against some sort of ideal world where all differences between private and social costs are reconciled. But what is this ideal world? What does the legal system look like in this world? What use is welfare analysis in this context if we have no idea how to even reach this ideal world? Coase advocates that instead, we should be comparing proposed policy changes against the current state of the world, taking into account transaction costs and social arrangements. In this way, we can produce relevant recommendations to help choose between different policy arrangements. 

**Discussion**

The deep critique here is the Pigouvian assumption that pricing markets have no transaction costs and does not interact with any sort of legal regime. It seems to me the usual way of dealing with this is to add in market imperfections or corrective measures to make the ideal world look a little more like the real world. Coase completely departs from this, abandoning this ideal world altogether, and instead focuses on using opportunity costs to compare alternative social arrangements. This is certainly not the Coase I know from the famous Coase Theorem! 

I also had the preconception that Coase was the usual old-school economist who dogmatically advocated for getting rid of all government intervention in favor of the free market. I was quite shocked to find that this paper did not show anti-government bias, instead advocating for case-by-case approaches to problems of externalities.

So how did we get here? Why is Coase known for the Coase Theorem (which I did not realize, was in fact coined by Stigler!) rather than his deeper (and in my opinion, much more interesting) critiques of neoclassical economics? Is it simply that it is too difficult to revise economic models in this way, and therefore outside the scope of the economic profession (whereas the Pigouvian framework offers a straightforward tool to take to policy questions)? 

I was definitely very taken with Coase's arguments upon finishing this paper, and generally agreed with most of his critiques, but was not sure where to actually go with his opportunity cost approach. This opportunity cost approach means that economists should compare the total value of production of different social arrangements. But what does this mean? What are the criteria for assessment? How can we possibly predict the indirect impact of propose policy changes on all other spheres of life? This is not to really critique of Coase, but a hope that someone smarter than me will have more answers. 