## TLDR

- Develop a simple model of buffalo hunting
  - model shows how the combination of an innovation in tanning, fixed world prices for hides, and open access to the herds proved fatal to the buffalo
  - fixed prices are necessary - if prices adjust considerably to changes in supply (as is the case if there was only a domestic market) then any large kill-off would have created excess supply, lowered prices, and dampened the incentive to hunt
  - Highlights the importance of international markets in the slaughter
- Rapid elimination of buffalo meant records are nonexistent
  - Use US trade statistics from nineteenth century which contained categories of exports that contained buffalo products, but no individual entry is labeled "buffalo meat", "buffalo robes", or "buffalo hides"
  - Author constructs a time series of buffalo hide exports
  - Also examine import data from Canada, UK, France, and Germany
  - Finds that approximately 6 million buffalo hides are exported over the 1871-1883 period - represents a buffalo kill of almost 9M
- Major contribution of this work:
  - identification of international trade as a key driver in the process
  - Case study of the speed with which property rights institutions can adapt in the face of new circumstances
- Many developing countries in the world today are heavily reliant on resource exports, and few, if any, have stringent regulation governing resource use → could probably make this argument for deforestation oops look like Dingel is already on this!

## II. The Model

- Simple dynamic model where agents hunt for buffalo or work in the outside good sector.
- Southern herd &rightarrow; Tanning innovation enters in as a price shock, shifting the kill function up
  - inducing a new steady state with a lower aggregate kill 
- Northern Herd &rightarrow; boom in northern hunting delayed until 1881 because of the hostile Sioux nation. After defeat of the nation, plus building of Northern Pacific railroad, this lowered transport costs and raised price of buffalo hunters could obtain for a kill
  - Change in hunter safety could be taken as exogenous shift rightward in distribution of hunter productivities
  - New railroad represents small price shock 
  - Two shocks work in the same way as tanning innovation 
  - Model delivers excessive hunting, overshooting in hunter numbers, and a punctuated buffalo slaughter

## III. Empirics

**Ruling out a European Demand Shock or a US Supply Shock**

* If European specific demand shock is driving US hide exports upwards for reasons unrelated to the availability of buffalo, this shock should show up in European imports from other countries as well
  * the innovation occurred in England and Germany - but why is this a problem for identification if demand for hide rose everywhere? Doesn't this still give us the negative effects of trade? Or just that we want to focus in on the innovation aspect? Weird if the innovation went to America but not other parts of Europe?
* Relative share of hides in Europe that came from the US soared 

**Ruling out US Supply Shock**

* Canada did not have access to the tanning technology
* Canada saw no large increase in US exported hides during the buffalo slaughter

**Empirical Strategy**
$$
s_it = \alpha_i + \beta_i t + \gamma T_{it}^S + \delta T_{it}^N + \epsilon_{it}
$$

* Robust and significant treatment effect for the South. Much smaller and insignificant effect for the North



## IV. Alternative Hypothesis 

Skip



## V. Substitutability, Size, and World Trade

Assumptions on how the US interacted with world hide markets

* Cattle hide and buffalo hide are perfect substitutes after adjusting for quality 
* Existence of a "world hide market" assumes hides from various countries in the world were close enough substitutes to make a meaningful aggregate - in reality hides came from all over the world and differed greatly
* US exports were small fraction of worldwide market

**Role of International Trade**

1. Destruction of the Southern herd and creation of the flint hide market would not have occurred absent the technical ability to tan buffalo in Europe
2. Being small on the world market meant that some of the typical insulating and signaling properties provided by a market price system were missing. World prices held firm even as hide supplies in the US rose, maintaining the incentive to hunt
   1. As bison numbers fell, prices again did not adjust to the signal rising scarcity



## Canvas Summary

**Summary**

In the late 1880s, it took only 10 years to slaughter roughly 10 to 15 million buffalos in the US. Many historians have linked this slaughter to the construction of railroads, killing by the Army, and native hunting practices. This paper presents evidence for an alternative hypothesis: technological innovation on the world buffalo market. 

Before 1871, buffalo was hunted for meat and sometimes as robes, but the meat spoiled quickly and it was costly to transport. Around 1871, German and English inventors found a tanning method that turned buffalo hides into useful leather. By 1872, the buffalo hunting market was in a full boom in the Southern Herd, and the buffalo population was decimated by 1879.  There was a delay in the slaughter of the Northern Herd due to the presence of hostile Sioux nation, which made buffalo hunting extremely dangerous. After the defeat of the Sioux nation in 1881, hunting was safe and the slaughter of the Northern Herd soon followed.

To illustrate the forces at play, the paper presents a simple dynamic model where agents choose to hunt for buffalo or work in the outside good sector. Within the setup of the model, the tanning innovation enters as a price shock, which shifts the kill function up to predict increased entry into the hunting market, representing what happened in the Southern herd. For the Northern Herd, the defeat of the Sioux nation entered the model as an exogenous shift rightward of the distribution of hunter productivity. Along with the fall of the Sioux nation, the building of Northern Pacific railroad also had an effect, lowering transport costs to effectively increase profits that hunters could obtain.  These two shocks work in the same way as tanning innovation. The model delivers predictions of excessive hunting, overshooting in hunter numbers, and a punctuated buffalo slaughter. 

The author then constructs a time series of buffalo hide exports, which the paper use to empirically investigate the rise in exports when the tanning innovation was discovered. The paper finds a robust and significant treatment effect that exports in the South during 1872-1879 skyrocketed. The effect for the North during 1881-1886 a fourth of the size and insignificant, which is consistent with historical documentation on the size of the slaughter. The paper also provides evidence that this increase was due to the tanning innovation, rather than due to a European demand shock or a US supply shock. 

The paper highlights two important takeaways on the role of international trade on environmental damages.

1. The destruction of the Southern herd would not have happened if it were not for the technical ability to tan buffalo in Europe
2. That US was a small player in the world market was important, since it made the US a price-taker. The typical insulating and signaling properties provided by a market price system were missing. World prices held firm, especially since cattle hide provided a bountiful substitute to buffalo hide. Thus, even as hide supplies in the US rose, the economic incentive to hunt did not change. 



**Discussion**

This paper was very well written, providing engaging historical context in addition to the empirical economic evidence. It makes an important point that "while it is well known that international trade can magnify any market failure present in autarky, finding significant and empirically verifiable examples of resource overuse tied to trade has proven to be quite difficult". While this is perhaps an obvious point inside the profession, it seems to often be lost in media and policy discussions of the impacts of trade. While buffalo extinction is perhaps not a relevant topic today, I can see this framework extending to many topics of deforestation, fisheries exploitation, and general loss of biodiversity due to the prioritization of economic development over environmental concerns. 

A technical question I had is how we actually set up and solve the hunter problem in the model? The control variable here seems to be to enter the hunting market or not (rather than the usual quantity control variable we've seen in class), and so it was hard for me to think about how to link this set up to the phase diagram we see in Figure 1. 



---

## Lecture Notes

* The "lever" here &rightarrow; rate of slaughter
* Trade as galvanizing force of market failures
* Market forces and depletion of renewable resources: A.M. Carlos and F.D. Lewis (1993, 1999); Patterson and Wilen (1977); R.C. All and I. Keay (2004)
* 3 Necessary and sufficient explanations
  1. Price for buffalo products that was largely invariant to changes in supply
  2. Open access conditions with no regulation of the buffalo kill
  3. A newly invented tanning process that allowed buffalo hides to be turned into valuable commercial leather
* Proving sufficient through model
  * Choosing to hunt is an endogenous decision, so the model is able to capture entrance and exit of hunting 
* Kill rate on the y axis for Figure 1. Not a time derivative
  * Dynamics are totally different. In our videos, dynamics driven by social planner. 
  * The hunters here, given productivity, is not forward looking at all. They just either kill or not kill - purely static problem. Super extreme version of common pool problem. The only dynamics are coming from the decline of stock and kill rate. 
* Discussion: role of international trade
  * Bringing advanced foreign technology to local markets
  * Limiting price adjustment and masking scarcity signals
  * Increasing the likelihood of extreme events
  * Altering the incentives for environmental regulation
* Lots of ways to write papers! 

